Hi and welcome back.
In this video I wanted to tell you a little bit
about some interesting Python collections
that come built in with the language
that you can use for a few different things.
So the main purpose of this video
is to make you aware that these things exist
because once you know they exist, later on,
you may find a situation where using one of them
could be useful.
Again going with the analogy of the tools
and the construction project,
I'm just giving you a few more unorthodox tools
that, nonetheless, could be useful.
Normally what happens in one of the situations
where we could do with one of these tools
but we don't know about them,
is that we have to work really hard
to build one that works well.
Instead of doing that, you can just use one of these.
So let's get started with the first one.
First one's gonna be a counter.
A counter, as you can imagine, allows us to count things.
So you can give it an iterable or a mapping,
like a dictionary,
and it would turn it into a counter of elements
so you can count how many there are pretty easily.
Again, how you do is from collections, import counter
and everything we're gonna be looking at in this video
comes from the Collections module.
These are some pretty useful collections.
Feel free to look up the Python documentation
if you wanna learn more about these
or others that are there.
And what we're gonna do is say something
like device_temperatures
is 13.5, 14.0, 14.0, 14.5, 14.5, 14.5, 14.5, 15.0 and 16.0.
Let us imagine we've got some sort of thermometer
that's been doing some readings
and we want to find out what the most
common temperature of our system is.
We could do some really contrived thing
where we loop over it,
We keep track of the ones that we've already seen,
we increase one every time we look at it.
That's just giving me a headache just thinking about it.
So, instead, we can do temperature, counter is going to be
a counter of device temperatures
and then we can print temperature counter 14.0.
So, access it as if it were a dictionary.
Just access the key that you want to get the count from
and you can see that it gives you two.
And if you go for 14.5, it gives you three.
Pretty simple counter.
You can give it a dictionary as well
and it will also turn it into a counter of things.
So, for example, you could have a counter
of greetings, how many times something has been said.
Let's say hello has been said five times,
hi has been said three times,
and then you can access a particular one
and it will just tell you again how many you've done.
So here, again, you get the three.
This one's not that useful.
The official Python documentation uses this example.
I'm still not 100% sure on why you would do this.
After all, you do have the counts here.
You don't need to wrap them in a counter for anything,
but I can see the usefulness for a list.
So who knows?
Maybe I'll find the situation where doing this is useful
later on, but I've not yet been able to use
a counter mapping for anything professionally,
but I've used this and it can be quite useful.
That's the counter.
Very simple.
Again, if you want to learn more about counters,
feel free to check out the official Python documentation.
It'll be in the further reading lecture of this section,
so feel free to check that out.
Now, the code for this video will all be available
altogether, but I'm going to just delete it
and go over to the next collection here
just to keep things a bit simpler, but the code will have
each counter, sorry not each counter,
will have each collection all in the same page.
So let's move onto default dict.
As we know, when we have a dict, such as this one,
hello, we'll set five times for example,
and we print my dict hi, we know what's gonna happen
when we do this.
It's gonna give us an error,
and indeed, as you can see here, we get a key error on hi
because it doesn't exist.
The default dict never raises a key error.
Cool.
So that's not it, though.
Instead, it returns the value returned by the function
specified when the object was instantiated.
Whew, that was a mouthful.
Let's do some code.
From collections, import default dict
and what we're gonna do is we're going to have a list
of coworkers and where they studied,
so here we've got a list of tuples
where the first element of the tuple is the name
of the coworker and the second one is where they studied.
So, you can see Rolf went to MIT, Jen went to Oxford,
Rolf then went to Cambridge to do a master's degree
and then Charlie went to Manchester at the end.
Now, let's say we wanted to create a dictionary
that maps names to where they've been.
Something like this.
Rolf went to, oh sorry forgot the colon there,
went to MIT and Cambridge and then Jen went to Oxford
and then Charlie went to Manchester.
Man-Chester.
Manchester!
There, there we go.
Imagine we wanted to make this dictionary,
but we only have this data.
So an option would be to go over each element
and put them in a dictionary.
Something more or less that looks like this.
We'd create our dictionary, alma maters,
which just means places where they've studied,
then we would iterate over our coworkers list
in coworkers there.
The coworker is now a tuple.
Zero is Rolf and one is MIT.
So we would say alma maters, coworker zero is an empty list,
first of all, and alma maters, coworker zero
dot append, coworker one.
So coworker one is MIT and what we're doing
is we're accessing the Rolf value of our dictionary
which has just been initialised, that's the word,
has been initialised to be an empty list
and we're gonna append to that empty list
the places where he's been.
Now, this works fine as long as they only appear once.
The first time they appear, in this case, Rolf,
we initialise it to an empty list and then we put MIT in it
then we do the same for Jen.
We initialise her to an empty list and we put Oxford in,
but then we come back to Rolf and what we do
is we once again set it to an empty list.
So we delete MIT and then we append Cambridge.
So we couldn't do this.
What we would have to do is say something like
if coworker zero not in alma maters,
sorry not in alma maters, set the value to the empty list
and if they are in the alma maters already,
it means we've done this before,
we can just append to the list
that we've already initialised before.
Not the simplest way of working with code.
Of course we can make it simpler
by destructuring the tuple here and just say
coworker, coworker, coworker, place.
Saves us from accessing the indices separately.
We could do this.
Of course, this editor removes closing brackets
for you, which is not a great feature.
So we could do this a bit better.
Still not brilliant.
And as you can see, what we're doing here is also,
once again, something that very common to do,
which is to add things to a dictionary
if they don't exist yet and otherwise
treat them as though they exist.
So what we're doing is when we don't have an element
in a dictionary, we're gonna set some default value for it
and after that, we're just gonna treat it
as though it's already there, for example,
appending to the list.
Naturally, the default dict is here to save us.
We can do default dict list.
List, remember, is a type when you have something like this
that is of type list and therefore,
because it's a type, it's a class.
Classes and types, same thing.
All things in Python are classes and objects
and so this is a class name.
Therefore, it's a function as well.
Remember, we can call our user constructor.
When we initialise a new user,
it's a function call essentially.
List is also a function call and I said earlier
that the default dict takes in a function.
This is the function that it takes in,
and what happens is when we try to access something
that doesn't exist, like Rolf,
it gives us the result of this function.
So it gives us a new empty list.
That's what this function does.
It gives you a new list.
So it gives you a new list and then you can append to it.
Does exactly the same as before,
only now we have a bit less boilerplate.
So we can do something like print coworker,
no, sorry, alma maters, Rolf.
That should print out two things.
Print alma maters Anne
and that should print out zero things.
Let's run it.
As you can see, we get MIT and Cambridge for Rolf
and for Anne, which didn't exist, we didn't have her
in our list here, we just print an empty list
because that's the default value for anything.
Now if you wanted to raise an error
or potentially print out none when
you try to access something that doesn't exist,
you can always do alma maters, default factory equals none.
And notice how, then, you get a key error
because now you've removed the default factory,
which is this list and Anne doesn't exist,
but Rolf does, so you still get
the default factory working in this bit of code here.
Just you don't get it working after this line.
So it's a nice tidbit here,
in case you want to remove the default factory
and not just be returning empty lists for everybody.
And similarly, you can, of course, also do alma maters
dot default factory is now an int, for example.
Then, whenever you try to append,
it will give you an empty integer, which is zero,
the value zero, and it will fail
but you can do things like do something else
with an int, with the number zero.
You can change the default factory is all I'm trying to say,
from list to dictionary or tuple or whatever you want.
Okay, let me give you another example.
So I'm going to delete all this stuff here
and let's say I've got my company, which is called Teclado
and if you don't know it, shame on you.
Then we've got our coworkers, which, let's say,
are Jen, Li, Charlie and Rhys.
Some of these are actual coworkers of Teclado.
Other coworkers, those are coworkers
that don't work at Teclado, we're gonna say they are,
for example, these tuples of Rolf and Apple Inc, lucky guy
and Anna is gonna be working at Google.
As you can see, these two have different structures.
For my coworkers, I already know where they work.
I only have a simple list.
Potentially, a tuple could be better.
Doesn't matter.
For my other coworkers, I've got a list of tuples,
where I define the name and also the place they work.
So, what to do is define a place like coworker companies,
and this is going to contain something
that is going to be like this.
Jen works at Teclado, Rolf works at Apple Inc and so forth.
So a mapping of names to the place they work.
How to do this?
default dict, lambda, my company.
My company is value of Teclado, this is a lambda function
that doesn't take any arguments.
There's no x before the colon
or no parameter name before the colon.
Doesn't take any arguments.
Always returns my company.
Why can we not just set my company there?
Because the default dict takes in a function.
So we have to set a function that will be called
when we access the key that doesn't exist.
Then we're gonna do for person, company in other coworkers.
We're gonna say coworker companies,
person equal company and that's it.
Oh, no, not that one.
There.
Now, we can do coworker companies, coworkers zero.
Remember, this is going to be Jen, our coworker from Teclado
and we can also print coworker companies
of other coworkers, zero, zero.
So this is going to be Rolf.
In order to simplify things,
I'm just going to type Rolf in here.
Now, we can run this.
And as you can see, we get Teclado for Jen
and we get Apple Inc for Rolf.
Rolf and Anna are actually in this dictionary,
when we finish the for loop.
Jen, Li, Charlie and Rhys are not in the dictionary,
but whenever we access them, we get the value
returned by this function, which is Teclado.
So this is a slightly more contrived example,
maybe not a terribly useful one,
but nonetheless, this is how you use a default dictionary.
I wanted to give you this lambda example here
in case you want a default value
that isn't initialised by a function.
So, just remember you can use a lambda function here.
That's fine.
You can use lambda functions anywhere,
where you can use normal functions.
So, what we've done here is created a mapping
of the other coworkers and then we can also access it
for our own coworkers
because we know where they work already.
Okay, that's it for this collection, the default dict.
We're gonna move on to Ordered Dict.
So, let's do it.
The Ordered Dict actually is a bit of a bizarre one
because it has the capital letters, so just remember that.
Remember the capital letters.
Ordered Dicts, not so useful.
We're gonna look at them more quickly,
just because they're going away soon, I think.
So, as you can see, we are just accessing normal keys
as if this were a normal dictionary.
We're setting the values in those keys to six, 12, three.
Then we can print them out.
And what you'll see here is an Ordered Dict,
where the keys here are Rolf, then Jose, then Jen
and the values are six, 12 and three.
Important is that they are in the order
in which they were inserted.
It does not mean they are ordered alphabetically
or anything like that.
It just means they're ordered in the way they were inserted.
So Rolf was the first one we added.
Rolf is always gonna be the first one there.
You can also do o dot move to end, Rolf
and that is gonna move Rolf
to the very end of this dictionary.
As you can see, Jose is now first, Jen is second,
Rolf is now at the end.
You can also do o dot move to start.
Sorry, my bad.
I wish that was the case.
Move to end, Jose, but now last is false.
And instead of it being the last,
it's going to move it over to the other end,
which is the beginning, but I'm gonna move Jen, of course,
because Jose is already the first one.
Now, you can see that Jen is the first one,
Jose is in the middle and Rolf's at the end.
Something else you can do is pop item
and this is going to give you a new dictionary
where the last item has been popped off, has been removed.
So pop, pretty popular programming term.
It just removes an item
and it normally removes items from the end.
So that's what we see here.
We've popped off the last item in the dictionary.
So, I don't think Ordered Dict is gonna really go away,
gonna be deleted from Python, but it's not so useful
now because as of Python 3.7, dictionaries themselves
are gonna be retaining the order in which they are inserted,
so it's going to be slightly less useful, the Ordered Dict.
It's still useful to keep these functions, move to end
and move to start and pop item and stuff like that,
which isn't in normal dictionaries,
but the fact that they're ordered
is going to be less important now because in Python 3.7,
as I said, normal dictionaries will start keeping the order.
Okay, let's move over to the next collection
and that's the named tuple.
I've gotta love this.
Named tuple.
I love the named tuple.
And the named tuple is another object that we can use
just like a tuple, but each of the elements has a name
and in addition, the tuple itself also has a name.
So it improves on tuples by making things
a bit more explicit.
Let's have an example here.
A checking account that has 850.90 dollars in it.
We can print account zero and we can print account one,
but it's not so clear what these are,
unless you're looking at a tuple.
If the account was being read from a database
and the code was a bit all over the place,
you wouldn't necessarily know what account zero is,
which is, of course, the name,
and you wouldn't necessarily know what account one is,
which is, of course, the balance.
Maybe you'd think this is the overdraft amount.
Maybe you'd think this is some sort of tag for the account.
I don't know.
You could think anything because it's not terribly clear
what they are.
If you wanted much more clarity, you could create a class
for your account and have a property called name,
which was checking, and a property called balance,
which is the balance.
Or you can use a named tuple.
So we're gonna define a new named tuple.
Notice how I'm using capital A here.
This is going to be a new named tuple.
The first parameter is the name of the tuple
and that has to be the same as the definition here, account.
That's because of the way Python works.
It can't quite see the name of the variable first.
So this name here has to be what you want your type to be.
Then, in a list, we're gonna define name and balance.
So these are the two fields on the tuple.
First one is checking and the second one
is the balance there.
Then we can do something like account is account checking
and 1850.90, so as you can see,
now we've used this named tuple instance
to create a new instance of this type account.
It's essentially the same as a tuple, except now,
we can print account dot name, for example,
if we can use the field names.
Indeed we can also print the account itself, if we want
and it has a nice representation.
A nice dunder-repper method here.
I like to think of it very much like defining a class,
where account is the class name or the type,
but it's not quite the same.
Named tuple is still a tuple, after all.
You don't have any custom methods
that you can define in a class, so it's like a nicer tuple
that allows you to be a bit more explicit
with what things mean.
That's the word.
You can still do things like name comma balance is account.
Tuple destructuring.
You can still do tuple destructuring.
When you define the account, you can have, of course,
named arguments in here, like you can in any function.
You can use positional arguments like the checking here
or you can used named arguments like here.
This makes things much nicer for you to be explicit
in what it means when you create a new account.
Given a tuple like this account here,
you can have an account named tuple
which is account dot underscore make account.
So, this is the type, dot underscore make
takes in a tuple and it will associate each element here
with the respective field.
This is particularly useful
for when you're using the map function.
Otherwise, you can, of course,
do this and that and that is the same thing.
You can also turn an account named tuple.
You can do asdict.
Let's print that one out for you to see what that is.
You can print it out as an ordered dictionary,
where it keeps the field orders.
Name goes first, balance goes second.
You can get it as a dictionary.
You can, then, of course, access it as a dictionary.
You can use this square bracket notation there
and that gives you the number, 1850.9.
So it's a pretty useful thing.
When you're dealing with data
and it doesn't warrant creating classes
for the data element you're working with
like, for example, when you're reading from a database,
you're reading from a csv file,
named tuple is a great choice and it's really flexible
and it just makes things more explicit
and more clear with what's going on.
So, definitely something to keep in your arsenal.
I think it's a pretty nice thing to use.
So definitely remember it.
Also the guy that made this, Raymond Hettinger,
is a pretty cool guy.
He makes a lot of nice Python talks,
so what he's made here is useful.
Let's move over to our last collection,
I know I'm boring you already, which is the deque.
The deque stands for double ended queue.
So please watch the presentation about queues,
if you haven't done so already.
It's just the video prior to this one
and a double ended queue is just like a queue,
but we can push elements from either the start
or their end and we can also remove elements
from either the start or the end.
It's very efficient, performs very well
and it's just essentially like a list,
but you can append or prepend, start and end
and you can pop from the start or from the end.
The most important thing about the dequeue
and the main reason why we use it sometimes
instead of a list, is because of its efficiency,
first of all, secondly, because it's thread safe.
So you can use dequeues when you're dealing with threads.
We're gonna look at threads very soon.
I know that we've not looked at them yet,
but essentially, a dequeue is really useful
when you're dealing with threads
because all its operations are thread safe.
So when we look at asynchronous development,
we're gonna be looking at the dequeue a bit more.
For now, just remember it.
It's like a list on which you do operations
that are very much like a list.
So, for example, friends can be a dequeue
where they get, let's say, Rolf, Charlie, Jen and Anna
and then you can do things like friends append, Jose.
What is happening in the dequeue constructor
is you're passing it an iterable and one by one,
it is appending them to itself, So this tuple here
then gets turned into the dequeue objects
or the elements of the dequeue.
You can then append to it.
You can do friends dot append left, Anthony, for example
and that Jose will appear at the end of the list,
of the dequeue rather.
Anthony would appear at the start of the dequeue
and you can also do friends dot pop.
That removes an element from the end
or you can do friends dot pop left.
Sorry, append left is with a capital L, my bad.
You can do friends dot pop, friends dot pop left,
that removes an element from the end.
This one removes it from the start.
So these are a couple things you can do, just to show you.
You can print friends and you can print friends here.
And then see that you get the dequeue here
with all the elements and then you've popped
one off each end there.
For more info on dequeues
and a comprehensive example on everything you can do,
check out the official Python documentation.
It is linked on this lecture as a resource.
Have a look if you are keen.
If not, when we move over to asynchronous development,
we're gonna be using it a bit more
and you'll understand why we use it instead of a list.
So, that's it for this video.
I hope I've not bored you too much with these collections.
I just think they're really useful tools
to keep in the back of your mind
and at some point, you may need them.
So it's always a good idea to remember that these exist
when you do need them, just know, ah, you know,
I think something like this existed.
Let me have a look at the official Python documentation
and see if I can find it and then you'll be able to find it.
If you don't know it exists, you're gonna have trouble.
You're gonna be trying to recreate
your own double ended queue instead of using the one
that's already provided and that works
and it's tested and it's validated that it all works.
So that's it for this video.
Thanks for watching and I'll see you on the next one.